# Conway's Game of Life for Music
[Conway's Game of Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life) is famous for the complex visual patterns that emerge from applying four simple rules to a grid of cells over time. This repository contains a combination of Ableton Max Devices and supplemental Max patches to enable the creation of musical compositions which translate these *visual patterns* of The Game of Life into *musical patterns*, using [Max For Live](https://www.ableton.com/en/live/max-for-live/).

## Directory Structure
All Max patches and Ableton Max Devices are located in a directory structure formatted to match where you would find them inside an Ableton project folder. This allows you to simply copy the outer `Presets` folder into the root of your Ableton project folder, and then the Ableton Max Devices will be available to use in your project. The files themselves are located at either `Presets/Audio Effects/Max Audio Effect` or `Presets/MIDI Effects/Max MIDI Effect`, depending on the type of device. There are three such `Presets` folders, the only difference being the size of the grid that the Game of Life will run on, either 8x8, 17x17, or 40x40. The larger the grid, the more elaborate Game of Life patterns can be displayed, but the more processing intensive it will be, and the more MIDI tracks you will need in your Ableton project.

## How It Works
To translate the visual patterns of Conway's Game of Life into musical patterns, a note is played for every cell that is alive. The note's pitch is determined by which row the cell is in. The higher the cell is in the grid, the higher the pitch it will play, and the lower the cell, the lower the pitch. The cell's column determines which Ableton MIDI track will play the note. This means that you have the freedom to map any other musical characteristic to the cell's position on the left/right axis, simply by setting the parameters of each MIDI track's instrument, effects, and mixer. For example, I have used this axis to change the timbre of the instrument playing the note based on which column the cell is in, or to pan the note that is played more to the left or to the right based on how close to the left or right edge of the grid the cell's column is.

## Key Components
The two primary Ableton Max Devices are the `Conductor` audio device and the `Player` MIDI device. The `Conductor` hosts the internal Game of Life, which runs inside the `conway` abstraction. It runs the game according to a customizable tick speed and pitch mapping, broadcasting the current state of the grid at every tick to any MIDI tracks with a `Player` device listening for this state. I tend to organize my Ableton project by putting the `Conductor` device on a group track, which groups a number of MIDI tracks equal to the size of the grid (i.e. number of columns), each with a `Player` device on them.

The `Player` device listens for updates to the state of a particular column assigned via the device's interface. The column numbers are zero-indexed, and `Player` devices by default will listen to columns in the same order as their MIDI track appears in Ableton (e.g. the `Player` device on the first MIDI track inside the `Conductor` group will listen to the first/leftmost column, the next MIDI track will listen to the second column, etc). When a `Player` device observes that a cell in its column has changed from being dead to alive, it will send a MIDI note on message to the MIDI track, with a MIDI note number corresponding with the cell's pitch (which is determined by its position on the vertical axis). When that cell dies, it will send a corresponding MIDI note off message. The MIDI note will not retrigger every time the cell remains alive between generations, unless note retriggering is enabled via the `Player` device's interface.

## Other Components
The `Note Config` MIDI device can be used to change the pitch mappings of the Game of Life while it is running, for example to create a chord progression. Incoming MIDI notes on the track played within a short window of each other will set the possible pitches to those notes, spread out across octaves, depending on how many notes are played and what size of grid you are using. The large grid does not support real-time note configuration, the medium grid only allows for three notes to be played (assumed to be a triad), and the small grid allows for one, three, four, five, or eight notes to be played (corresponding with a unison, a triad, a seventh chord, a ninth chord, or a specific note for each of the 8 pitches).

The `Remote Tick` MIDI device can be placed on a MIDI track to control the exact timing of a `Conductor`'s ticks between generations. Any incoming MIDI note on the track will send a message to any `Conductor`s to advance to the next generation. Therefore, a MIDI clip allows you to create a pre-defined rhythm at which the Game of Life advances and new notes are played, other than the default steady tick rate when a `Conductor` is running automatically. You can also use real-time MIDI input such as playing a MIDI keyboard to advance the Game of Life to a live rhythm.

The `Display` device is a utility I created for screen recording a grid while it plays the music, in order to create a video of the resulting music synced to the visuals of the grid. Screen recording the grid displayed inside Ableton on a `Conductor` device is not high enough resolution due to the limited available vertical space on an Ableton device, so to circumvent this I used this `Display` device to run the same Game of Life in parallel on a much higher resolution grid that I screen record from the Max patch editing window, in order to not be constrained by Ableton's device height. This device is only useful if you wish to do the same.

The `midi parser` device simply tells you which MIDI note numbers you are playing, in order to quickly find out what note numbers correspond with certain notes such as a key or a chord, when you are trying to create a manual pitch mapping. This was useful for me when determining what pitches to map to the large grid.
